Democrats2
Democrats, Seeing a Weaker Trump, Are Falling in Line Behind Biden
Concerns about the president’s age are being overcome by enthusiasm about his record so far, optimism about the G.O.P. field — and the absence of better options.
PHILADELPHIA — Nine months ago, amid sky-high gas prices and legislative gridlock, anxious Democrats routinely offered the same assessments of President Biden as a candidate for re-election: too frail, too politically weak, too much of a throwback.
But now, as Democratic National Committee members gather in Philadelphia for their winter meeting this week, nearly all have come to the same conclusion: It’s Biden or bust.
After Democrats far exceeded their own expectations in the midterms, and now that they are facing the possibility of a rematch against a far more vulnerable Donald Trump, the bickering about Mr. Biden has subsided.
With no other serious contenders making early moves to enter the race, the official party structure has united behind the president’s re-election bid — despite the inherent risks in an octogenarian candidate’s undertaking the rigors of a national campaign.
Gov. Phil Murphy of New Jersey, who is chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, an organization full of members predisposed to imagine themselves in the White House, said any discussion of possible challenges had gone quiet in recent months.
“I don’t hear any chatter of anybody considering taking him on in our party, and I think for good reason,” Mr. Murphy said. “What I see is a guy who’s still on top of his game.”
While challenges to a sitting president are rare, the lack of even a whisper of intraparty opposition this year is notable given Mr. Biden’s already record-setting age as president.
If he won, he would be 82 when sworn in for a second term.
In Philadelphia, where delegates chanted “four more years” as Mr. Biden spoke on Friday evening, concerns about his age were confined to quiet conversations — a tacit recognition that the time had passed for Democrats to question the wisdom of nominating a member of the Silent Generation. 
Despite months of speculation about a restive bench of potential challengers, no serious Democratic contenders appear to be doing the kinds of donor outreach, staff hiring or visits to early-primary states that typically portend a presidential bid.
Nor is there any clamoring for a primary race — to hedge Democratic bets or to ensure Mr. Biden addresses any perceived vulnerabilities well before a general election — even amid an expanding investigation into Mr. Biden’s mishandling of classified documents.
“Let me ask you a simple question: Are you with me?” Mr. Biden asked the crowd of D.N.C. members on Friday night, to boisterous cheers.
An even more overt acknowledgment is to be made on Saturday, when Democrats are set to vote on a measure that would make it vastly more difficult for a potential primary challenger to catch fire. 
A new primary calendar, devised by Mr. Biden and his advisers, would vault to the front a number of states that propelled him to the nomination in 2020, starting with South Carolina.
Still, with the election 641 days away, much remains uncertain. 
The shape of the Republican field remains unclear, as does the country’s economic forecast. 
And while Mr. Biden intends to run for re-election, he is unlikely to announce his campaign until the early spring, according to people close to the president, and is still working through key details like hiring a campaign manager. 
(Were Mr. Biden not to run, Vice President Kamala Harris could benefit from the new calendar, which increases the influence of states where Black voters make up a large portion of the primary electorate.)
Many Democrats feel warmly about Mr. Biden, a party stalwart for half a century, and are hesitant to appear disloyal or insensitive by publicly questioning his fitness for a second term. 
They are also keenly aware of how primary challenges weakened incumbent presidents: Several Biden allies pointedly mentioned Senator Edward M. Kennedy’s failed 1980 primary race against President Jimmy Carter, who then was defeated by Ronald Reagan.
Indeed, Mr. Biden’s age is one reason many Democrats are hoping that Mr. Trump, who at 76 is just four years younger, wins the G.O.P. nomination. 
After years of worrying about Mr. Trump’s political potency, many Democrats scarred from underestimating him in 2016 now see him as eminently beatable, especially by Mr. Biden.
But some fear that a contest between Mr. Biden and a younger challenger, like Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida or former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina, could create a more challenging contrast for the president.
“Trump would be a preferred candidate,” said Jay Jacobs, chairman of the New York State Democratic Committee, even as he said he believed Mr. Biden would be strong regardless and noted that Mr. DeSantis was untested on the national stage. But a younger nominee, he added, “mixes it up in a way that you don’t have any ability to judge how it will look going forward.”
At a moment when Democrats regard the return of Mr. Trump, or the rise of someone practicing his style of politics, as a threat to democracy, there is enormous pressure from all corners of the party to avoid damaging Mr. Biden.
“Speaking as a progressive, Biden was not my first choice for president, but I think he’s done an extremely good job with the hand that he’s been dealt,” said RL Miller, a climate activist and Democratic National Committee member from California. 
“I find the talk of 2024 challengers to him to be both disrespectful and distracting.”
But elections are determined by voters, not party officials, and the Democratic base has concerns about another Biden bid, even if the party’s officials see the president as their strongest option. 
Majorities of Democrats in surveys conducted in December, a month after the party’s unexpected midterm successes, said they did not want Mr. Biden to seek re-election.
“The majority of the party and Biden voters didn’t vote for Biden, they voted against Trump,” said Liano Sharon, a delegate from Michigan who voted for Biden in 2020. 
“If the party pushes Biden on the grass roots again, a lot of them aren’t going to show up, because of Biden’s policies, broken promises and other big problems,” including his concern that Mr. Biden was showing signs of decline.
That view had little support in Philadelphia, however, where the only sign of opposition to a Biden re-election bid was a billboard on the back of a truck circling outside, advertising a group calling itself DontRunJoe.org. Its founder, Jeff Cohen, conceded as much: “We’re beating our heads against the wall here,” he said.
Without a viable alternative willing to jump into the race, elected Democrats and top party officials find themselves like the dinner party guests in a horror-film spoof on “Saturday Night Live” last year who are terrified of a 2024 Biden candidacy but even more scared of the other possible candidates. Several Democratic officials brought up the sketch unprompted to describe their attachment to a Biden re-election bid.
“What is the alternative? Like, who’s the alternative?” said Representative Ritchie Torres of New York, casting Mr. Biden as a strong contender with “the most consequential presidency in recent history.”
He added, “If I’m asked who is best positioned to win in 2024, I’m unaware of an alternative to President Biden.”
So far, no prominent Democrats are taking even cursory steps to establish themselves as presidential timber. Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois made a much-remarked-upon trip to New Hampshire last summer, but he has pledged allegiance to Mr. Biden. 
Other big names, including Gov. Gavin Newsom of California and Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, have followed suit.
Only Marianne Williamson, the self-help author who ran a quixotic presidential campaign in 2020, has acknowledged mulling a primary challenge, citing concerns over a Democratic Party that she said had “swerved from its unequivocal and unabashed advocacy for the working people.”
In an interview, Ms. Williamson said she would not run “simply to make a point” but to give Americans options. 
“The question I ask myself is not ‘What is my path to victory?’” she said. “My question is ‘What is my path to radical truth-telling?’ 
There are some things that need to be said in this country.”
Absent more credible potential primary threats, Biden allies are reveling in a sense of vindication after a stressful midterm campaign. 
Mr. Biden, they say, will counter concerns about his age in his re-election campaign with arguments about the value of his long experience in government.
“He’s always underestimated by people in his party and outside his party,” said former Representative Cedric L. Richmond, who served as a senior adviser to Mr. Biden at the White House, rattling off a list of the president’s legislative accomplishments. 
“They said he couldn’t win the presidency. He did.”
But the next election may bear little resemblance to the last. Unlike in 2020, when Mr. Biden conducted much of his campaign over video from his basement because of the coronavirus, his re-election bid could require the kind of grueling travel that has long been customary in presidential contests. 
A noticeably more languid pace by Mr. Biden could set up a stark contrast if Republicans abandon Mr. Trump in favor of a younger nominee.
Bill Shaheen, a D.N.C. member from New Hampshire, called Mr. Biden “physically fit” and energetic.
But, drawing on personal experience, Mr. Shaheen, who is 79, added, “There’s only so much you can do when you’re our age.”
Having helped run primary campaigns in New Hampshire for presidents as far back as Mr. Carter and campaigned for his wife, Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Mr. Shaheen said they could be exhausting.
“By the time the primaries were done, I was wiped out,” he said. “And the general election, as well — I mean, it is extremely physically demanding.”
Still, Mr. Shaheen, who has strongly disagreed with Mr. Biden’s effort to reshuffle the presidential primary calendar — a move that would make New Hampshire the second contest alongside Nevada, rather than the first primary — said that if Mr. Biden wants to run again, “I want him to do it.”
Biden Signs Bill to Protect Same-Sex Marriage Rights
Proponents of the legislation argued that Congress needed to be proactive in ensuring a future Supreme Court would not invalidate same-sex marriages around the country.
WASHINGTON — President Biden signed the Respect for Marriage Act into law on Tuesday, mandating federal recognition for same-sex marriages and capping his own personal evolution toward embracing gay rights over the course of a four-decade political career.
In an elaborate signing ceremony on the South Lawn, complete with musical performances from Cyndi Lauper and Sam Smith, Mr. Biden told thousands of supporters and lawmakers that the new law represents a rare moment of bipartisanship when Democrats and Republicans came together.
“My fellow Americans, the road to this moment has been long, but those who believe in equality and justice, you never gave up,” Mr. Biden told the crowd, which White House officials later said had5,300 people, before signing the bill to loud cheers. 
He added: “We got it done. We’re going to continue the work ahead. I promise you.”
The landmark legislation, passed by a bipartisan coalition in Congress, officially erases the Defense of Marriage Act, which a quarter of a century ago formally defined marriage as between a man and a woman. 
The new law prohibits states from denying the validity of out-of-state marriages based on sex, race or ethnicity.
The gathering on the crisp, December afternoon, with the White House as a backdrop, was especially significant for Democratic lawmakers, for whom it could be the last major bill signing of their tenure given that Republican control of the House begins next month.
For Mr. Biden, who voted for the Defense of Marriage Act as a senator in 1996 and wavered on letting gay men and lesbians serve in the military, the signing ceremony was an indication of how much the president has changed when it comes to championing L.G.B.T.Q. equality.
It is also another example of how Mr. Biden’s gradual transformation as a politician more broadly has matched the evolution of his own party since he started in public life as a junior senator on Jan. 3, 1973.
His views on issues like abortion, gay marriage and sentencing reform — which once put him on the more conservative side of his party’s ideological spectrum — now more firmly match positions that have galvanized Democrats and even many Republicans over the past several years.
The country continues to have deep ideological fissures. But in some areas, there are now new and different majorities expressing support for societal and political norms that were far different a generation ago, shifting over time much as the president has.
In many ways, his arc is the country’s arc.
Mr. Biden, 80, was raised in a time when much of the country was less tolerant of people’s sexual orientations. 
His policy choices in the Senate reflected those times, often siding with those who proposed restrictions, or limits, on gay men and lesbians. 
He supported a measure that restricted how homosexuality was taught in schools, one of many defeats for the equality movement.
During his 2008 vice-presidential debate with Sarah Palin, Mr. Biden said he opposed “redefining from a civil side what constitutes marriage.” 
But people close to Mr. Biden said he kept an open mind about the issue and was a keen observer of the ways that society was changing around him — and slowly changed his positions.  
“I do respect and appreciate that he is someone that can admit that his views were outdated in the past and that he has evolved on the subject and is now an outspoken champion and advocate,” said Kelley Robinson, the president of Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights organization in Washington. 
“This is a matter of policy and politicians catching up to where the people already are.”
Mr. Biden also now firmly supports the rights of women to choose to have an abortion, despite having had reservations earlier in his career. 
A practicing Catholic, the president was once an outright critic of abortion rights but later became a quiet — if uncomfortable — defender of them in the Senate.
Since the Supreme Court’s ruling in June to end the constitutional right to an abortion, Mr. Biden has been fervent in his condemnation of the decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization and has repeatedly called for legislation that would replace the 50-year-old court precedent with legal protections for the right of women to have an abortion.
Mr. Biden has also shifted his views on criminal sentencing, an issue that has increasingly brought Democrats and Republicans together in recent years. 
In 2018, President Donald J. Trump signed the First Step Act, a bipartisan compromise to reform sentencing laws, including mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenders.
As a young senator, Mr. Biden repeatedly supported tough-on-crime legislation, culminating in his support for the 1994 crime bill that many in his party now blame for an era of mass incarceration, especially of minorities. 
In a speech at the time, Mr. Biden bragged that his view of crime was to “lock the S.O.B.s up.”
That is no longer his view. 
As a candidate, he promised to undo provisions of the 1994 law. 
And as president, he has used the power of clemency to free people imprisoned for decades for minor crimes. 
In October, Mr. Biden issued a blanket pardon for anyone convicted of the federal crime of simple possession of marijuana. 
He has encouraged governors to follow suit for state marijuana laws.
But no issue represents Mr. Biden’s tendency to adapt to societal and political change as well as gay marriage. 
Polls show a sea change in public opinion across the political spectrum in the past decade, with nearly 70 percent of Americans now saying they support the right of same-sex couples to be married, with all the rights that heterosexual couples have under the law.
The president was unequivocal in his support for the law he signed on Tuesday, saying earlier this year that he was confident that “Republicans and Democrats can work together to secure the fundamental right of Americans to marry the person they love.”
But it is also a mark of ongoing fear that newfound gay rights may be fragile. 
The push for passage of the law was driven in part by the Supreme Court opinion overturning abortion rights, in which Justice Clarence Thomas raised the possibility of using the same logic to reconsider decisions protecting marriage equality and contraception rights.
Opponents of the legislation argued that it would undermine family values in the United States and restrict the religious freedoms of people who do not believe that same-sex marriage is moral.
Proponents of the new law insisted that Congress needed to be proactive in ensuring that a future Supreme Court ruling would not invalidate same-sex marriages around the country. In 2015, the court ruled in Obergefell v. Hodges that all states must recognize the marriages of same-sex couples just as they would marriages between a man and a woman.
Once a fiercely divisive political issue, the broad-based acceptance for same-sex marriages was the backdrop for a rare show of bipartisanship in Congress, where 61 senators and 258 House members voted to send the Respect for Marriage Act to Mr. Biden’s desk for his signature.
By the time that happened, there was no doubt that the president would sign it. 
As a candidate for the presidency in 2020, he was an ardent supporter of gay rights and same-sex marriage. 
He has appointed scores of L.G.B.T.Q. officials to posts in his administration, including Pete Buttigieg as transportation secretary. 
Some gay rights leaders have hailed him as the most pro-equality president ever.
As vice president, Mr. Biden publicly announced his support for same-sex marriage before his boss, President Barack Obama, upending careful plans for Mr. Obama’s re-election announcement. 
In an interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press” in 2012, Mr. Biden said that “I am absolutely comfortable with the fact that men marrying men, women marrying women and heterosexual men and women marrying one another are entitled to the same exact rights, all the civil rights.”
It was a significant moment, especially for one of the nation’s most prominent Catholic politicians. 
Tuesday’s signing of the marriage bill is the latest evidence that whatever qualms Mr. Biden had during earlier stages of his career have all but evaporated.
“On this day, Jill and I are thinking of the courageous couples and fiercely committed advocates who have fought for decades to secure nationwide marriage equality at the Supreme Court and in Congress,” Mr. Biden said in a statement after House passage last week. 
“We must never stop fighting for full equality for L.G.B.T.Q.I.+ Americans and all Americans.”
Courts Reject Challenges to Biden Plan on Student Debt
A federal judge ruled that six states lacked standing to block the program, and Justice Amy Coney Barrett indicated the same thing about a taxpayers’ association.
WASHINGTON — Attempts to block President Biden’s student debt relief programs were dealt dual setbacks on Thursday, as a federal judge in Missouri and Justice Amy Coney Barrett rejected challenges to the sweeping measure, one that could cost the government hundreds of billions of dollars.
Judge Henry E. Autrey of the Federal District Court in St. Louis dismissed the more prominent of the two lawsuits, one brought by six Republican-led states. 
The suit accused Mr. Biden of overstepping his authority under a 2003 federal law that allows the education secretary to modify financial assistance programs for students “in connection with a war or other military operation or national emergency.”
The plan cancels $10,000 in debt for those earning less than $125,000 per year, or $250,000 per household, and $20,000 for those who received Pell grants for low-income families. 
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said last month that it estimated the plan’s price tag at $400 billion, and the Education Department followed a few days later with a similar estimate of $379 billion over the life of the program.
Judge Autrey, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, did not rule on the larger issue in the lawsuit, which was brought by Nebraska, Missouri, Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas and South Carolina. 
Instead, he said the states had not suffered injuries of the sort that gave them standing to sue.
“While plaintiffs present important and significant challenges to the debt relief plan,” the judge wrote, “the current plaintiffs are unable to proceed to the resolution of these challenges.”
The states said they planned to appeal.
The states’ case was viewed as the most significant threat to Mr. Biden’s plan, and Judge Autrey’s ruling allowed the government to start discharging loans as soon as Sunday. 
More than 12 million people have applied for debt cancellation since the application portal opened late last week.
Other legal challenges remain, including a lawsuit backed by the Job Creators Network, a right-leaning trade group of business owners. 
A hearing on their request for an injunction is scheduled to be held on Tuesday before a federal judge in Fort Worth.
In a second development on Thursday, Justice Barrett rejected a separate challenge to the debt relief program, this one from a taxpayers’ association in Wisconsin.
Justice Barrett denied the association’s challenge without comment, which is the court’s custom in ruling on emergency applications. 
She acted on her own, without referring the application to the full court, and she did not ask the administration for a response. 
Both of those moves were indications that the application was not on solid legal footing.
Although she did not say so, Justice Barrett most likely rejected the application because the plaintiff, the Brown County Taxpayers Association, appeared to lack standing.
Judge William C. Griesbach of the Federal District Court in Green Bay, Wis., had dismissed the association’s case without addressing whether Mr. Biden had acted lawfully. 
Instead, Judge Griesbach, who was appointed by Mr. Bush, ruled that the association had failed to show that it had standing to sue.
The Supreme Court has said that the mere payment of taxes does not give plaintiffs standing to challenge government programs. 
“If every federal taxpayer could sue to challenge any government expenditure, the federal courts would cease to function as courts of law and would be cast in the role of general complaint bureaus,” Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. wrote in 2007.
The court has carved out a narrow exception for some religious challenges, though Judge Griesbach noted that even that exception “has been the subject of much criticism.”
He rejected the group’s request to expand the exception to allow the challenge to the student loan program. 
“This court certainly has no authority to do so,” he wrote.
Judge Griesbach also questioned whether an injunction stopping the program would be warranted even if the challenger had standing. 
If the administration acted unlawfully, he wrote, people who obtain debt relief might again be liable for forgiven debts.
“A future administration may not be bound” by the Biden administration’s program, the judge wrote, “and may seek to collect the purportedly forgiven debts.” 
Judge Griesbach added that “those seeking to take advantage of the program” may want “to consider this possibility before placing undue reliance on the benefits promised.”
A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in Chicago, refused to intervene in an unsigned order that gave no reasons. 
Justice Barrett oversees that circuit, and emergency applications concerning its rulings are addressed to her in the first instance.
In its application, the association argued that the sums involved warranted loosening the standing rules. 
“We are witnessing a gargantuan increase in the national debt accomplished by a complete disregard for limitations on the constitutional spending authority,” the association’s lawyers wrote.
They added: “The argument that a president may unilaterally forgive debt owed to the U.S. Treasury through executive fiat, and that no one has standing to challenge him, threatens the very foundations of a constitutional republic.”