Republican2
Trump Is Sued in Death of Capitol Police Officer After Jan. 6
The suit in the death of Brian D. Sicknick seeks millions in damages from the former president, whom it paints as responsible for the violence that day, and two Capitol rioters.
Jan. 6: This article was updated with a response from a spokesperson for former President Donald J. Trump.
WASHINGTON — The longtime partner of a Capitol Police officer who died after the Jan. 6 attack sued former President Donald J. Trump and two Capitol rioters on Thursday, arguing that his death was a “direct and foreseeable consequence” of their roles in the mob violence that day.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court for the District of Columbia just before the second anniversary of the attack, seeks at least $10 million in damages each from Mr. Trump and two men accused of assaulting the officer, Brian D. Sicknick, with chemical spray on Jan. 6, George Tanios and Julian Elie Khater. Mr. Khater pleaded guilty in the assault, and Mr. Tanios pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges.
“The horrific events of Jan. 6, 2021, including Officer Sicknick’s tragic, wrongful death, were a direct and foreseeable consequence of the defendants’ unlawful actions,” the suit said, adding that “the defendants are responsible for the injury and destruction that followed.”
Officer Sicknick died the day after the attack, but the Washington medical examiner ruled that it was from natural causes — multiple strokes that occurred hours after the mob confrontation — and prosecutors shied away from linking his death to the assault. 
But the medical examiner also said that “all that transpired played a role in his condition,” and the Capitol Police consider his death a “line of duty” fatality.
In her suit, Sandra Garza, who as Officer Sicknick’s longtime partner is a representative of his estate, painted Mr. Trump as culpable both broadly for the violence on Jan. 6 and specifically for Officer Sicknick’s death.
The suit cited the conclusions of the House committee that investigated the Jan. 6 attack, saying that the panel “made a number of criminal referrals” against Mr. Trump “based on its finding of ‘sufficient evidence of one or more potential violations,’” including inciting an insurrection.
In a statement early Friday, a spokesperson for Mr. Trump dismissed the lawsuit as a frivolous attack.
The former president is facing an array of civil suits arguing that he is liable for major financial damages for his role in the events surrounding the Jan. 6 attack. A federal judge in February allowed three civil suits against Mr. Trump to move forward. The case is currently being appealed.
Officer Sicknick is one of five police officers at the Capitol on Jan. 6 who died in the year after the attack. 
The four other officers — Jeffrey Smith, Howard S. Liebengood, Gunther Hashida and Kyle DeFreytag — died by suicide.
Wisconsin Voters Re-elect Johnson, an Election Denier, in a Key Senate Race Senator Ron Johnson, a Republican and one of the foremost spreaders of misinformation, won a third term, turning back a challenge from Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes.
Senator Ron Johnson, a Wisconsin Republican and one of the nation’s foremost spreaders of misinformation, won a third term, according to The Associated Press, turning back a challenge from his Democratic rival, Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes.
Mr. Johnson’s victory, in what became one of the ugliest Senate races in the country and the most expensive contest in Wisconsin history, is critical to Republican efforts to win back a Senate majority.
Like his victories in 2010 and 2016 over Russ Feingold, a Democrat, Mr. Johnson defeated Mr. Barnes after initially trailing in public polls.
In August, after Mr. Barnes won the Democratic primary as the clear favorite, Mr. Johnson and his Republican allies began a strident campaign to label him as a soft-on-crime, anti-American radical.
Senator Ron Johnson, a Wisconsin Republican and one of the nation’s foremost spreaders of misinformation, won a third term, according to The Associated Press, turning back a challenge from his Democratic rival, Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes.
Mr. Johnson’s victory, in what became one of the ugliest Senate races in the country and the most expensive contest in Wisconsin history, is critical to Republican efforts to win back a Senate majority.
Like his victories in 2010 and 2016 over Russ Feingold, a Democrat, Mr. Johnson defeated Mr. Barnes after initially trailing in public polls.
In August, after Mr. Barnes won the Democratic primary as the clear favorite, Mr. Johnson and his Republican allies began a strident campaign to label him as a soft-on-crime, anti-American radical.
Democrats had criticized Mr. Johnson as a self-dealer who used his dozen years in the Senate to enrich himself and his big donors — a strategy agreed to more than a year ago by officials in Washington and Wisconsin.
They largely did not stress to voters Mr. Johnson’s role in former President Donald J. Trump’s effort to overturn the result of the 2020 election or his pushing of discredited Covid treatments.
Now Mr. Johnson, 67, will return to Washington for a third term that he said six years ago he would not seek. 
He began to change his tune shortly before the 2020 election and formally launched his re-election bid early this year.
Mr. Barnes, 35, had cast himself as the voice of a new generation of Wisconsin Democrats, ending his stump speeches with a rousing, “It’s our time now.”
But Mr. Barnes struggled to win over the middle-of-the-road voters.
Mr. Johnson’s September advertising blitz turned the race around, burying Mr. Barnes under a largely unanswered mountain of attack ads using his own words that called for a redistribution of law enforcement resources, criticized police practices and praised progressive officials. 
Mr. Barnes tried to distance himself from his past statements, but Mr. Johnson’s ads put him in a hole too deep to dig out from.
Mr. Johnson, a former plastics manufacturing executive, is just the second Wisconsin Republican to win a third Senate term in the last century. 
Senator Alexander Wiley served four terms from 1939 to 1963, and Senator Robert La Follette, a liberal Republican known as “Fighting Bob,” spent the last 20 years of his life in the Senate. 
He remains one of the most influential and celebrated political figures in the state’s history.
Trump, Reacting to Pending Jan. 6 Subpoena, Repeats Election Lies in Letter
In a rambling, 14-page restatement of false claims and conspiracy theories, the former president did not indicate whether he would testify before the House panel investigating the Capitol riot.
WASHINGTON — Former President Donald J. Trump responded on Friday to a promised subpoena from the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 assault with a lengthy, rambling letter that attacked the panel’s work, reiterated false claims of widespread voting fraud and presaged a potentially bruising battle over whether he could be compelled to testify about his role in the riot and his efforts to subvert the 2020 election.
In a 14-page missive that did not address whether he would comply with the subpoena, Mr. Trump perpetuated the same lies that had fueled the attack and boasted about the size of the crowd that had amassed to hear him speak before marching to the Capitol and staging a violent siege.
The former president has indicated privately to aides that he would be willing to testify to the House panel but would like to do so live, according to a person close to him, a prospect that would prevent video of him from being clipped or edited in a manner he dislikes. 
The letter he released on Friday — a conspiracy theory-filled rehash of his many grievances and false assertions — underscored the risks for the committee of giving Mr. Trump an unfettered public platform.
“The presidential election of 2020 was rigged and stolen!” the letter began in all capital letters.
Mr. Trump dedicated page after page to repeating that lie about the 2020 election, which he lost to President Biden, a fact he has repeatedly refused to acknowledge.
“You have not gone after the people that created the fraud, but rather great American patriots who questioned it, as is their constitutional right,” Mr. Trump wrote in the screed. 
“These people have had their lives ruined as your committee sits back and basks in the glow.”
Instead of providing what he claimed was evidence, he included appendices filled with assertions of widespread election irregularities that have been debunked, some by his own former attorney general, William P. Barr, and other top Justice Department officials.
“A large percentage of American citizens, including almost the entire Republican Party, feel that the election was rigged and stolen,” Mr. Trump wrote, without mentioning that his false claims were the reason the lies spread among the populace and have come to define the G.O.P.
He included aerial photographs purporting to show enormous throngs of people on the National Mall on Jan. 6, 2021 — reminiscent of the images that the White House released after his inauguration in 2017 — and again complained of what he claimed was media censorship that downplayed the size of the crowd.
The letter emerged as the House committee, which had voted unanimously on Thursday to issue a subpoena to Mr. Trump, was at work preparing the demand, which would list specific documents that the former president must turn over and a date by when he must testify. 
People close to the committee’s work said the panel was poised to issue the subpoena as soon as Monday.
While Mr. Trump was unlikely to comply with the subpoena — he previously refused to testify in his impeachment trial — committee and staff members were discussing whether they would accept him testifying live. 
Those familiar with the discussions said the committee seemed open to the idea, believing the panel could most likely elicit some significant developments from Mr. Trump’s testimony.
Should Mr. Trump decline to appear, it could lead to a precedent-setting fight. 
Several former presidents voluntarily testified before Congress, but there is no Supreme Court precedent that says whether Congress has the power to compel a former president to testify about his actions in office.
Committee members said they believed Mr. Trump should want to comply with the subpoena.
“I want to believe again that every American citizen who knows something about these events would come forward to testify, and nobody knows more about them than Donald Trump does,” said Representative Jamie Raskin, Democrat of Maryland and a member of the committee.
Representative Bennie Thompson, Democrat of Mississippi and the chairman of the committee, told reporters on Thursday that he hoped Mr. Trump would comply but that he believed the panel had compiled a comprehensive case of the events of Jan. 6 without the former president’s testimony.
“If we get his attention, fine,” Mr. Thompson said. “If not, we’ll go with the evidence we collected.”
Mr. Trump’s explosive reaction came the day after a hearing in which the Jan. 6 panel summed up its case against the former president, and presented remarkable behind-the-scenes video that showed top congressional leaders scrambling to secure the Capitol during the attack.
In another portion of the video released on Friday to CNN, Speaker Nancy Pelosi can be seen talking by cellphone to Vice President Mike Pence, asking about his well-being and advising him, “Don’t let anybody know where you are.” The moment underscored the danger Mr. Pence faced as the rioters called for his execution and Mr. Trump insulted him on Twitter.
Mr. Trump never attempted to check on Mr. Pence, who had been evacuated from the Capitol just minutes before the mob flooded the area where he had been. But in a separate phone call sometime that afternoon, Mr. Pence’s chief of staff, Marc Short, reached Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, to say that he and the vice president were safe, according to a person briefed on the exchange.
During the call, Mr. Short said that they believed the counting of electoral votes should resume that night and Mr. Meadows agreed, the person said.
But when Mr. Meadows asked where the vice president was, Mr. Short declined to provide specifics, saying only that they were around the Capitol.